---
---
The importance of habitat selection processes and dispersal to the functioning of subdivided populations has been shown by theoretical approaches, but few empirical studies have dealt with the underlying behavioural mechanisms and their ecological implications. Breeding populations of seabirds are naturally subdivided at different spatial scales and represent good models to study these processes. In particular, detailed observations on a kittiwake Rissa tridactyla population in Brittany, France, suggested that individuals use the reproductive success of conspecifics for selecting among potential breeding patches. In particular, failed breeders and young prospecting birds were suspected to be attracted successful areas. The observational data used nevertheless did not permit to ascertain the causal nature of the associations observed. The aim of the present work was to test experimentally several predictions of this hypothesis. Specifically, we manipulated the local reproductive success of kittiwakes on a set of study plots in order to test the behavioural responses of the birds in terms of attendance of local breeders and prospecting individuals. The experiment was carried out on the island of Horn&#248;ya, Norway, and local success was manipulated by reducing or increasing brood size during incubation on a series of replicated plots. Lower attendance of local breeders following their breeding failure and lower prospecting by birds that did not breed on the plot was predicted for plots with reduced local reproductive success. Conversely, we predicted higher attendance of failed breeders and prospectors on plots where a high success was maintained. We also predicted that a higher proportion of failed breeders from unsuccessful plots would be recorded prospecting for sites compared to failed breeders from successful plots. Finally, behavioural responses were expected to be stronger on isolated cliffs compared to plots adjacent to productive areas. Our results are discussed in relation to factors determining heterogeneity among individuals, nest site availability and patch quality at different scales. Understanding the behavioural mechanisms behind differential dispersal and recruitment among breeding patches is crucial for studying the dynamics of subdivided populations and has direct conservation implications for species like seabirds.