---
tags: edward, Southern Ocean, iron, SOIREE
---
Active fluorescence (Fast Repetiton Rate Fluorometry, FRRF) was used to follow the photosynthetic response of the phytoplankton community during the Southern Ocean Iron RElease Experiment (SOIREE). This *in situ* iron enrichment was conducted in the polar waters of the Australasian-Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean in February 1999. Iron fertilisation of these High Nitrate Low Chlorophyll (HNLC) waters resulted in an increase in the photosynthetic competence (Fv/Fm) of the resident cells from around 0.20 to greater than 0.60 (i.e. close to the theoretical maximum) by days 10/11 of the experiment. Although a significant iron-mediated response in Fv/Fm was detected as early as 24 h after the initial enrichment, the increase in Fv/Fm to double ambient levels took 6 days. This response was five-fold slower that observed in iron enrichments (in situ and in vitro) in the HNLC waters of the sub-polar and Equatorial Pacific. During SOIREE, the photosynthetic competence of the resident phytoplankton in iron-enriched waters increased at dissolved iron levels above 0.2 nM, suggesting that iron limitation was alleviated at this concentration. Increases in Fv/Fm of cells within three algal size classes suggested that all taxa displayed a photosynthetic response to iron enrichment. Other physiological proxies of algal iron stress (such as flavodoxin expression) exhibited different trends than Fv/Fm during the time-course of SOIREE, the relationship between Fv/Fm, algal growth rate and such proxies in Southern Ocean waters is discussed.
