---
pdf: brouwer_characterisation_2022.pdf
tags: kath, philipp, fisheries, dragonfly, report
title: Characterisation of the fisheries catching silky sharks (<i>Carcharhinus falciformis</i>) in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean
---
The next stock assessment for silky shark (<i>Carcharhinus falciformis</i>) is scheduled for 2024.The work leading up to the assessment will be undertaken over two years. This paper, aswell as Neubauer et al. (2023), represent the background work for the SC19s considerationand information for feedback into the SC20 assessment. Silky shark are caught as bycatchin longline fisheries targeting tuna, billfish and blue sharks between 10oN and 20oS, andas bycatch in the tropical purse seine fisheries of the WCPO. No target fisheries exist forsilky sharks and since 1st July 2014 their retention has been prohibited within the WCPO.Since 2015, almost all silky sharks have been discarded or cut-free from longline sets andmore than half of those are released alive and healthy. Similarly, in the purse seine fishery,all silky sharks have been released since 2015, but release condition is largely unknown.

This paper describes the longline gear designs that catch silky sharks; presentsinformation on fate and condition; length data; raw CPUE information; and discussesthe impact of vessel flag and observer program on the spatio-temporal distribution of thecatch and provides recommendation for the 2024 stock assessment.

The following recommendations are proposed for the Scientific Committee to consider:
- Observer programs and/or vessel flag be included along with gear characteristicsas variables in CPUE and length analysis standardisation.- Incorporate post release survival of silky sharks into other analyses evaluatingmeasures to reduce fishing-related mortality.- Noting that there are very few data for the release condition of silky sharks landedon purse seine vessels, it is recommended that observers on purse seine vessels beencouraged to collect data on shark release condition.- It is recommended that the 2024 stock assessment explicitly provide commentaryon the recent trends in fishing mortality since the inception on CMM2019-04.
