---
tags: katrin, Chatham Rise, meiofauna
---
Metazoan meiofauna was sampled along a temperate latitude transect (41–47&#176;E 178&#176;30'E) across the Chatham Rise, south-west Pacific, from water depths of 350–2600 m on three occasions (austral autumn 1997, spring 1997, summer 2000). Samples were collected using a multicorer and extracted on a 63-μm mesh. Meiofaunal density and biomass were negatively correlated with water depth, median grain-size and sediment calcium carbonate content, and positively correlated with sediment chlorophyll *a*. There were no significant relationships between meiofaunal abundance and biomass and measures of sediment organic matter and bacterial productivity and biomass, except in summer when bacterial and meiofaunal biomass were positively correlated. Vertical penetration of meiofauna into the sediment was related to sediment organic matter and sediment chloroplastic pigments. Variation in meiofaunal abundance at different spatial scales was examined at two sites: at 450 and 2300 m on the northern slope of the rise. At both sites, variation between subcores of a multicore (< 10-cm scale) was lower than that of multicores within a deployment (< 1-m scale). However, whilst the highest variance component at the shallow site was for multicores within a deployment, it was between multicore deployments (< 1-km scale) for the deep site. Meiofaunal density and biomass were generally higher on the southern slope of the rise than on the northern slope, a trend probably attributable to high productivity of the overlying Subtropical Front and the flux of more nutritious organic material to the sea floor.
