---
pdf: Morrisonetal_2014_AEBR130.pdf
tags: katrin, benthic, report
---
Fisheries research and management has traditionally been focussed on the fish populations, while the
habitats and environments which underpin their production have been largely ignored. This situation
is changing, with an increasing awareness that habitats are important and can be degraded through
human activities, both marine and land-based. While the wider field of marine ecology has been
researching such fish-habitat themes for a number of decades, the species worked on are often small,
site-attached, and relatively short-lived; while fisheries species tend to be larger bodied, and operate
over much larger spatial and temporal scales. Given this, quantitatively linking fisheries species to
habitats is a challenge, and an active field of research. One type of habitat that appears to be
especially important for many demersal species are those referred to as 'biogenic' habitats.

These biogenic habitats are formed by plants and animals, and occur from the inter-tidal out to the
deep sea. Well known biogenic habitats include salt marshes, mangrove forests, seagrass meadows,
kelp forests, bryozoan fields, and shellfish beds. For the purposes of this review, biogenic habitats are
defined as a) those living species that form emergent three-dimensional structure, that separate areas
in which they occur from surrounding lower vertical dimension seafloor habitats and b) non-living
structure generated by living organisms, such as infaunal tubes and burrows. A sub-set of these
habitats are biogenic "reefs", which are visually imposing, and are defined as "solid, massive
structures which are created by accumulations of organisms, usually rising from the seabed, or at least
clearly forming a substantial, discrete community or habitat which is very different from the
surrounding seabed. The structure of the reef may be composed almost entirely of the reef building
organism and its tubes or shells, or it may to some degree be composed of sediments, stones and
shells bound together by the organisms."

The functions provided by these habitats are diverse, and can include the elevation of biodiversity,
bentho-pelagic coupling, sediment baffling, protection from erosion, nutrient recycling, the provision
of shelter and food for a wide range of other organisms, and even the creation of geological features
over longer time scales. They also directly underpin fisheries production for a range of species,
through: 1) the provision of shelter from predation, 2) the provision of associated prey species, and in
some cases, 3) the provision of surfaces for reproductive purposes e.g. the laying of elasmobranch egg
cases; as well as, 4) indirectly in the case of primary producers through trophic pathways.

In New Zealand, historical data on biogenic habitat extents and changes over time are very poor, and
largely limited to shallow estuarine systems where change is visually observable (e.g. salt marsh,
mangroves, seagrass and oyster beds), and/or where the biogenic species is actively harvested (e.g.
green-lipped mussels), or strongly associated with fish catches (e.g. the bryozoan beds of Separation
Point, and off Torrent Bay with coastal finfish; and the bryozoan reefs of Foveaux Strait with dredge
oysters). For such species where data is available (often 'just' anecdotal accounts), strong declines
have occurred, which appear largely attributable to land-based effects (e.g., sedimentation and
elevated nutrient levels), and fishing impacts. Examples include the extensive loss of seagrass
meadows (e.g. large areas in Whangarei, Waitemata, Manukau, Tauranga and Avon-Heathcote
estuaries), green-lipped mussel beds (about 500 km<sup>2</sup> in the Hauraki Gulf), bryozoan beds (about 80
km<sup>2</sup> in Torrent Bay, about 800 km<sup>2</sup> in Foveaux Strait), and deep-water coral thickets on sea-mounts. Mangrove forests, in contrast, are one of the few biogenic habitat habitats which have greatly
expanded in extent, following initial losses during European settlement through land reclamation and
the building of infrastructure. Cumulatively, the magnitude and extent of biogenic habitat losses are
likely to have been very substantial, but are unknown, and probably will never be able to be
calculated. Other biogenic habitat species for which evidence points to historical losses include horse
mussels, kelp forests, oyster beds, and sponges, both in assemblages where they tend to dominate, and
as part of mixed biogenic habitat assemblages.

In the New Zealand context, there is currently no marine habitat classification system at the scale of
biotopes (defined as recognisable and re-occurring natural associations of plants and animals), with
the sole exception being a validated broad level habitat classification for shallow north-eastern New
Zealand rocky reefs (including kelp forests and algal mats). This makes the formal and systematic
evaluation of biogenic habitats problematic, and so in this review we work our way through biogenic
habitats based on their intuitively obvious visual identities, and associated habitat quality variations
where quantified. World-wide, biogenic habitats have seriously declined in extent and quality over
time scales of decades to centuries, with global reviews (subject to some geographic data gaps) all
showing serious regional and global declines in wetlands, sea-grasses, kelp forests, and oyster reefs;
other biogenic habitats, including subtidal ones, may also be in decline but data is unavailable. The
many functions and species associated with these habitats have by association also been lost or
severely reduced. These fundamental changes in ecosystem structure and functioning have until
recently been largely ignored or overlooked, partly through the phenomena of 'sliding environmental
baselines', where each succeeding human generation has a different view of what is 'natural' in the
oceans. [...]
