---
pdf: Neubauer_thesis.pdf
tags: philipp, bayesian, marine-biology, ecology
---
Connectivity between local populations is critical if these are to function as
a metapopulation and sustain locally open sink populations. Assessing whether
such connections between local populations exist is thus an important step
towards understanding coastal metapopulation dynamics as well as assessing the
efficacy of spatial management tools such as marine reserve networks. For this
thesis, I investigate population connectivity of the common triplefin
(*Forsterygion lapillum*) in Cook Strait, New Zealand, using chemical signatures
contained within fish otoliths (ear stones). I concentrate on likely
connections between three local marine reserves: Kapiti Island (Kapiti coast),
Long Island (Marlborough Sounds) and Taputeranga Marine Reserve (Wellington
south coast). To this end I develop and implement new statistical methods to
enable stronger inferences from otolith chemistry based approaches.

In chapter 2, I evaluate otolith core chemistry as a potential tool (i.e. an
environmental fingerprint) for identification of natal source populations of
the common triplefin. I sampled otolith chemistry from hatchling fish across a
range of hierarchical scales: obtained from individual egg masses within a
site; sites within different regions; and regions distributed on the two main
islands of New Zealand (North and South Island). This sampling enabled me to
construct an “atlas” (or baseline) of otolith core chemistry. I developed and
applied a set of novel statistical approaches to examine the characteristics of
this natal atlas and optimize its spatial resolution. These analyses allowed me
to assess the utility of otolith chemistry as a potential tool to infer
patterns of population connectivity in the vicinity of Cook Strait.

Chapter 3 develops a new Bayesian approach to facilitate improved clustering
and classification of dispersing fish to putative natal populations based on
their otolith chemistry. Otolith-based approaches used to infer natal origins
of fishes routinely suffer from the (unrealized) requirement to sample all
potential natal source populations. An incomplete baseline atlas has greatly
limited the application of otolith chemistry as a tool for assessments of
connectivity in the marine environment. In this chapter, I develop, evaluate,
and implement statistical solutions to this problem. Specifically, I present a
clustering model, based on infinite mixtures, which does not require the
specification of a potential number of sources. In a second step, I embed this
clustering model in a large-scale classification model that allows for
classification on scales encompassing a number of potential sources, where
recruits are clustered with observations from the baseline or a separate
cluster within these regions. This opens the potential for fish that came from
an identifiable source other than those sampled to not be assigned to a sampled
source. I evaluate the strength of this approach using the well-known weakfish
(*Cynoscion regalis*) dataset.

In chapter 4, I apply the statistical methods developed in chapter 3 to the
common triplefin. I sampled recent recruits of the common triplefin within each
of three marine reserves (Kapiti, Long Island, and Taputeranga) and used
otolith chemistry to infer probable natal origins. I then compare these
inferred patterns of connectivity with those predicted by a set of hydrodynamic
simulations. This comparison enabled me to (qualitatively) assess the
likelihood of connectivity (as predicted by otolith chemistry) given local
hydrodynamic conditions.

For chapter 5, I extend the Bayesian modelling approaches developed in previous
chapters to incorporate otolith chemistry data sampled from throughout the
life-history of dispersers. As in chapter 3, I develop and evaluate the utility
of this approach using a previously published data set (Chinook salmon), and I
apply the approach to the common triplefin in a subsequent chapter.
Specifically, I propose flexible formulations based on latent state models, and
compare these in a series of illustrative simulations and an application to
Chinook salmon contingent analysis.

In chapter 6, I apply the Bayesian framework (developed in chapter 5) to the
common triplefin data set. Specifically, I formulate a model based on putative
chemical distinctions between inshore and offshore water-masses. This model
allows me to compare dispersal histories among recruits to a set of reserves
(evaluated initially in chapter 4), and the approach reveals patterns that
appear to be common to all successful recruits. I examine these findings in the
light of results obtained in chapter 4 as well as local hydrodynamic
conditions.

Finally, I conclude my thesis in chapter 7 by discussing the relevance of my
findings for the functioning of networks of sub-populations, both in a
metapopulation and a reserve network context.
