---
pdf: neubauer_characterisation_2024.pdf
tags: philipp, tyla, characterisation, fisheries, dragonfly, report
---
Albacore within the New Zealand fishery waters are part of the South Pacific Ocean stock which isdistributed from the equator south to about 50°S. The broader stock is managed by two Regional FisheriesManagement Organisations (RFMOs); the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) managesthe eastern part of the stock, while the western part is managed under the Western and Central PacificFisheries Commission (WCPFC). In the WCPFC Convention Area, albacore are landed in a numberof fisheries but primarily from longline and troll fisheries, with over 75% of the troll catch comingfrom New Zealand waters. This report updates the characterisation and CPUE analyses for the NewZealand albacore (*Thunnus alalunga*) fishery presented in 2021, and provides additional analyses intodrivers of variability of albacore cohorts and length compositions in New Zealand waters. This issueis particularly relevant due to recent concerns about length composition data from New Zealand's trollfishery contributing to potentially spurious signals of very low recruitment over 2015 and 2017, whichdrives a strong reduction in spawning biomass in projections from the 2021 South Pacific albacore stockassessment. The present analysis was undertaken to provide information for the regional stock assessmentundertaken by the Pacific Community (SPC) and focuses primarily on the troll fishery which lands thebulk of the catch in New Zealand, but longline data are also included.

The present analysis describes the fisheries targeting and catching albacore in New Zealand, andundertakes a CPUE standardisation of the commercial troll fishery. Data for the fishery descriptionincluded the catch and effort from 1990 to 2023 from albacore troll target sets, all other troll activity,and all trips where albacore was specified as the target or recorded as bycatch. In recent years, bothunstandardised CPUE and landings have declined in the fishery. For the CPUE analysis, catch-effortdata for albacore target trolling only were modelled using maximum-likelihood generalised linearmodels (GLMs) predicting the catch as a function of spatial, temporal and environmental predictors.The models without environmental predictors provided a minimal standardising effect, producingCPUE series that show little long-term trend. Overall, the series, which now extends 30 years,fluctuates without trend over the last two decades, but recent standardised CPUE is at an all-time low.Models with environmental predictors showed a strong standardising effect of the El-Nino SouthernOscillation on catch rates. The standardised CPUE index is likely a reflection of availability and/orcatchability, rather than a representative signal of abundance.

Length compositions from New Zealand’s troll fisheries were analysed in two separate ways to gaininsights into drivers of variability in the length composition of troll-caught albacore in New Zealandwaters. First, a mixture model was constructed that aimed to partition the length data into three apparentlength-cohorts by year. Although the model did not provide an good fit to the data, it suggested thatthe presence in the catch of the first cohort (thought to be one-year old fish) is highly variable in spaceand time, and may be related to vessel selectivity: there was little consistency in months or areas wherethese fish appeared in a given year, and only a small influence from sea-surface temperature on cohortabundance.

A more flexible model was fitted that avoided the assumption of specific cohorts. The model was usedto investigate if standardising length compositions for environmental conditions and time- and area offishing trips would lead to materially different predicted length compositions across the New Zealandtroll fisheries from the compositions that have been reported based on scaled catch-sampling. Allanalyses pointed to fishing vessels contributing substantially to variability in observed compositions,suggesting that catch sampling effort should be spread across as many vessels as possible to ensure
representative length compositions can be achieved. This analysis also confirmed findings from themixture model, suggesting that spatio-temporal patterns in length compositions are significant, butcannot be explained by sea-surface temperature alone. Nevertheless, predicted length-compositions forthe total catch effort of the NZ troll fishery suggested that standardising compositions has a minorimpact. Significantly, the 2018 length-compositions remain largely unchanged by the standardisationapproach, confirming abnormally high proportions of one-year-old fish in that year, withcorrespondingly lower proportions of older fish. However, both catch and CPUE were high in 2018,and compositions scaled to catch suggest that the composition in 2018 may be a reflection ofabnormally high abundance of young fish in New Zealand waters in 2018, rather than abnormally lowabundance of other cohorts. The result highlights the importance of interpreting the information of locallength compositions in the light of local availability and catch trends.