---
title: Joining the dots for pāua fishers
---

Tom McCowan, a PhD student working for the Pāua Industry Council Ltd
(PIC), is currently being housed at Dragonfly.

Tom's job is to get the pāua dive-logger programme up and running
nationwide - the next step from the proof-of-concept stage. The dive
loggers collect detailed data on diver location and catch, and the
programme will ultimately give fishers access to up-to-date
information on the state of the fishery, reef by reef. The loggers are
currently being widely used in the Marlborough and Chatham Islands
areas.

<!--more-->

![Tom (right) on a pāua research trip  during his
PhD](/news/2012-11-29-tom-mccowan/Tom-McCowan.jpg)

Jeremy Cooper, CEO of PIC is certain that New Zealand’s pāua fisheries
need to have management implemented at a reef-scale, rather than a
fishery-wide scale.

“What we’re doing with the dive-loggers is trailblazing all the way –
it’s world leading science with no road maps. With Tom’s help we are
figuring out if we are collecting too much, too little or the right
kind of data to get relevant information back to our fishers. It takes
time and resources, but there is no doubt it’s the future for us,” he
says.

Tom is working with the fishers to iron out any operational problems,
and is helping Dragonfly Science design reporting systems that will
give feedback to the industry on how the logger programme is going.
The immediate goal of the project is to produce a monthly report for
each fishery, so they can see how fishing is performing in their area.

“This is a real step forward for those divers who have been wearing
loggers on their backs for a couple of years but have not seen any of
the data. They will now get a report from a central database of what
they’ve been doing, in a form that’s relevant.” says Tom.

Tom’s almost-completed PhD from the University of Otago is in
genetics, where he used genetic markers to trace survival rates of
pāua that had been raised to 10 mm shell-length in a hatchery, then
reseeded (released back) into wild populations.

“One of today’s big questions is whether reseeding pāua is
economically viable. Babysitting them through that first year isn’t
cheap and the industry needs to know if the results justify the cost.

“We already know that up to 35% of the hatchery pāua may grow to a
harvestable size five years down the track, and modelling studies have
worked out the optimum size for release from the hatchery. My work is
following on from that with the genetic tracing method.”

Tom grew up diving and fishing, and has enjoyed applying his
experience to the pāua study. He also has a law degree and was
admitted to the bar last year. Tom can be contacted on
[tommccowan@gmail.com](mailto:tommccowan@gmail.com)

[Read a previous story about a dive-logger trial in
Marlborough.](http://www.dragonfly.co.nz/posts/2012/06/13/mapping-paua/)
