---
title: Mapping pāua catch with GPS
---

The Paua Industry Council (PIC) has been developing data logging
technology for fisheries management for a number of years, but
recently got Dragonfly involved to analyse their data, extract
the relevant information and present it in a useful way.

A Marlborough-based pāua fishing company, Saavid Fishing Ltd, has
monitored its fishery using GPS-based technology for some years, and
helped develop and trial a number of different data logging units for
PIC.
<!--more-->

David Baker from Saavid Fishing is a commercial pāua diver and
his family makes a living from the fishery. He is also Chair of
PauaMAC7, the Paua Management Action Committee for Paua Management
Area 7.

“Through PIC, the industry has been working with Nelson-based
Zebra-Tech since 2007, doing field testing and helping refine the GPS
equipment they’ve developed. It’s a great system now—a little data
logger sits in a pouch of the diver’s wetsuit and monitors his or her
position, time at depth and water temperature. When the information
gets downloaded back on board, we can tell exactly what was caught and
where”, he says.

“Getting all the data is one thing, but the next step was to get
Dragonfly involved to pull out the useful information for us and
calculate a CPUE (catch per unit effort).

To calculate the CPUE, a diver’s time underwater, the total time spent
fishing (including swimming on the surface and underwater), the catch
and the area fished were needed. In addition, a fishdown experiment
was carried out in a completely unfished area nearby to determine the
relationships between the CPUE and the relative abundance of pāua in
the area.

![David Baker (Saavid Fishing) and Julie Hills (Ministry for Primary
Industries)](/news/2012-06-13-mapping-paua/Dave-and-Julie.png)David
continues, “These techniques allow us to get immediate feedback on
stocks rather than waiting three years for a stock assessment report.
Also, it’s on a hectare block (100 m) scale rather than a 10 km scale,
so we get much more detail.

“Two good things come out of this for us as an industry – firstly we
can manage the fishery much more closely and make it more sustainable.
It’s easy to go too far with pāua – they are a hard little animal to
manage. We also hope that by having a record of good data, we will
avoid having to do costly stock assessments in the future.

“This project has seen us jump ahead quite a few years because of the
information we can gather about our fishery. It’s world-leading.”

Study results were presented by Edward at the International Abalone
Symposium in Hobart in early May. The presentation slides may be
viewed on
[speakerdeck](https://speakerdeck.com/edwardabraham/paua-catch-per-unit-effort-from-gps-dive-loggers).

