---
title: Working at the beach this summer 
---
Dragonfly are surveying cockle and pipi populations in the wider
Auckland region and toheroa in Southland for the Ministry for Primary
Industries (MPI).

The work in northern New Zealand is currently underway, with Katrin
leading the project. “I’m a soft-sediment ecologist so
it’s a good opportunity to get into this kind of work and make use of
my skills. We’re sampling a range of beaches, inlets and estuaries,
from the Bay of Plenty to Whangarei.”

<!--more-->

These bivalve surveys are part of MPI’s regular monitoring of the
fisheries. The northern areas have been surveyed annually for the last
few years, but the toheroa surveys in Southland are conducted more
infrequently, with the previous one in 2009.

“Because the North Island surveys have been regular, we already have a
good understanding of where the bivalves are. We are using a random
stratified sampling design where we dig up several hundred cores that
are 15 cm in diameter and 15 cm deep, then sieve the sand to count and
measure the bivalves. Then we will analyse the data and write a
report.”

“We’ve recruited six ecology students to help with the fieldwork but
we’ve also contacted local iwi and the local communities to invite
them to be involved if they would like to. They are very welcome.”

Cockles and pipi are available for recreational and customary
fisheries, but due to decreases in abundance, some of the beaches have
restrictions in place, and others are completely closed to fishing.
MPI is particularly interested in how these populations are faring.

![Toheroa at Orepuki
beach](/news/2014-01-15-working-beach-summer/Oreti-beach-and-toheroa.jpg)Toheroa
are New Zealand’s largest shellfish, and mature individuals can be
more than 11 cm long. This treasured species was once very abundant on
beaches in Northland and Southland but populations are now closed to
recreational fishing, although there is still some customary take. The
Dragonfly team will be sampling three Southland beaches for toheroa
abundance and size distribution, including the 18 km long Oreti Beach.
They visited the beaches in early January to plan the work.

“The environment is very different here, so we’ll be running transects
from the shore to the water line, then digging up quadrats and sieving
parts of those. The animals can burrow to about 20 cm depth, so we
have to go quite deep.”

Burrowing ghost shrimp, the subject of Katrin’s PhD thesis and
subsequent research, are also being counted. They co-occur with
toheroa and may be having an impact on the decline of the toheroa
populations.

“We want to establish what their densities are, compared with toheroa.
Ghost shrimp are present in a relatively high density on these beaches
and we know that their sediment disturbance has an impact on bivalves.
Although toheroa are very large, there might be an impact on the
recruitment of the juveniles, or the larvae may be ingested by the
shrimp.”

