---
title: Latest regional GDP data added to the Regional Economic Activity Report
---
New Zealand’s regional gross domestic product data, for the year ended March 2015, are
now available via the Regional Economic Activity Report (REAR) website
developed by Dragonfly. 

<!--more-->

Chris and Finlay worked with
the Ministry of Business, Innovation, & Employment (MBIE) to load the 
Statistics NZ’s data into the website on the day it was released. The website helps Government make the data
available across more channels.

“We update the report regularly, when new data is available,” says Chris. 

“As long as the structure of the input data is the same, then the updating is 
automatic. That’s the beauty of the system we built, that it can get the information 
out to the public on the same day it’s released.” 

The data is built onto a staging site at Dragonfly, checked by MBIE staff and then published. 
According to Statistics NZ, Auckland’s contribution to total GDP for the year 
ended March 2015 was 36.6 percent. Canterbury contributed 13.6 percent, with 
Wellington narrowly behind at 13.5 percent. The smallest contribution was from 
the West Coast region (0.7 percent). GDP in the Auckland region grew by 4.2% over the year to 
March 2015, while GDP in Southland shrank by 10.5% over the same period.

Explore the regional GDP below, visit the full [REAR website](http://webrear.mbie.govt.nz), 
or read the Statistics NZ [media release](http://www.stats.govt.nz/browse_for_stats/economic_indicators/NationalAccounts/RegionalGDP_MRYeMar15.aspx).

<div style="width: 600px; margin: auto;">
<iframe src="https://teal-skua-dev.dragonfly.co.nz/theme/gdp-per-capita/map/a/2015/auckland/?embed=dynamic" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0" width="600" height="1424"></iframe>
</div>

